the US Secretary of States in Israel in
another push for a ceasefire in Gaza he
says a deal is achievable to pause the
near seven-month War but the Israeli
Prime Minister has again vowed to invade
Rafa so how will Benjamin netanyahu's
comments affect mediation efforts this
is Inside Story
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Nick Clark so the time is now
Anthony blinkin striking an urgent tone
in his attempts to get a ceasefire in
Gaza America's top Diplomat says a
strong proposal is on the table as he
makes his seventh visit to the Middle
East since fighting began in October
that as indirect negotiations for a
ceasefire between Israel and Hamas carry
on in Egypt but questions being raised
about the chances of an agreement being
reached after the Israeli Prime Minister
reiterated his plan to invade Rafa Can
Benjamin nety who's threat disrupt talks
to end the war this killed more than
34,500 Palestinians we'll explore this
and other issues with our guests in just
a moment but first this report by Kao
Lopez
hodan A Renewed push to reach a
ceasefire deal in Gaza US Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin met with Israeli
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
calling for an agreement between Israel
and Hamas it's a message he emphasized
earlier while meeting with Israeli
president Isaac Herzog we're determined
uh to get a ceasefire that brings the
hostages home and to get it now uh and
the only reason that that wouldn't be
achieved is because of Hamas critics say
it's not that simple Israel has begun
launching air strikes on Rafa and
Netanyahu was threatening to launch a
Fool's SC operation in the southern city
with or without a ceasefire
deal we'll enter Rafa because we have no
other choice we'll destroy the Hamas
battalions there we will complete all
the objectives of the war including the
repatriation of all the
abductees Allies like the US Germany and
France have warned Netanyahu against the
move but he's under greater pressure
from within his own government support
from farri min SS gave Netanyahu another
term and they've warned him they can
also end
it the Prime Minister has promised that
Israel is going into Rafa he promised
that we're not ending this war and a
neglectful deal will not be made I
congratulate those words and I think the
Prime Minister understands the
implications if this does not take
place more than 34,000 Palestinians have
been killed since October 7th Hamas
leaders have accused Netanyahu of
intentionally extending the war to stay
in power bring our children home today
in Israel families of captives are
staging protest demanding a deal to get
their loved ones home apply whatever
pressure is necessary to Hamas but not
only to Hamas also to the Israeli Prime
Minister apply whatever pressure is
necessary and in Rafa about 1.5 million
Palestinians wait with nowhere else to
go
the UN Chief Antonio gutiz says an
assault on the city would lead to an
unbearable escalation with devastating
consequences in Gaza and The Wider
region Kia Lopez oan Al jazer for Inside
Story So plenty to take on let's bring
in our guest joining us from London is
Daniel Levy he's president of the US
Middle East project and a former Israeli
negotiator noro day it's a political
analyst she joins us by Skype from Aman
and joining us by Skype from Washington
DC is William Lawrence he's a professor
at American University and a former US
Diplomat a warm welcome to each of you
so as negotiations continue I'm
wondering what the motivation is for
Benjamin Netanyahu Daniel Levy uh to say
that he will invade Rafa ceasefire or no
ceasefire does he mean it how can there
be a ceasefire and a wholesale attack on
Rafa Daniel over to
you the simple answer Nick is those two
things cannot go together and to the
extent to which there was some sense
maybe this prolonged impass in the
mediated
talks could be found a way out of
precisely because For the First time
there was a sense that maybe the US was
leaning into the idea of a permanent
rather than a temporary ceasefire and
that would allow Hamas to move the
negotiations forward from their side to
the extent to which it looked possible
prime minister Natan yahu just took a
sore to that he just chopped that off at
the knees because by insisting that a
rougher operation would go together
would continue no matter what nanyu was
conscious of what he was doing and he
was yet again trying to undermine the
talks but what's important to
acknowledge here Nick is he was doing so
because he felt confident he had already
heard the American side say it's a
generous offer Hamas over to you if this
doesn't happen there's only one party to
blame so nanyu was essentially LED off
the hook yet again by an American
president an American Secretary of State
an American Administration who have
allowed this war to continue who have
provided the weapons and Natan is in no
hurry for him a long War a Forever War
is politically beneficial and I do think
one should take the Israeli Prime
Minister seriously I do think the
preparations are being made fora I do
not think there is an IDF consensus but
if nanyu has his way and he is not
stopped then the over 1 million
Palestinians in Rafa are going to face
what is going to be one can imagine yet
another horrendous violation of
international law Devastation killing
and you know that that is going to
happen if something else doesn't
intervene and it blink just blew the
chance right can something else
intervene William Lawrence what do you
think Netanyahu let off the hook and if
so what are the implications for any
ceasefire
deal well I agree Gro Moto with what
Daniel's saying I I I don't think he's
entirely off the hook I still think that
the US pressure is uh quite intense I
think this uh there's many flaws in the
negotiation here both the public and the
private part uh one is this idea of a
permanent ceasefire that's called a
peace treaty or an Armistice and that
doesn't exist it's not even really on
the table uh and now that's why we're
seeing phrases like sustainable calm and
you know longer syation of hostilities
for a year uh formulas within which
could be pressured and if you parse
netanyahu's statements since early
February uh you know when this was first
proposed and the Rafa operation was
first delayed he leaves wiggle room
he'll say things like well I won't be
forced into something I don't agree to
but then he implies if he agreed to
something then you know he could be
given another way out which is the
Americans Made Me Do It um there's also
a problem here that Israel is operating
as if Hamas is in a very weak position
which they don't believe they're in
Hamas is believes the US sorry the
Israeli side is in a very weak position
because of the protesting United States
and other things and operating
negotiating on that basis isn't really
going to get us to an outcome
um I think the latests are promising and
not impossible um the this this sort of
um dance that's going on where Hamas
goes to Cairo and leaves and Israelis go
to Cairo and leaves is not good I Wasing
this week they'd all be in one place and
maybe Bill Burns would show up I heard
that technical negotiations will shift
to Doha tomorrow uh but this isn't over
yet one way that um you know one
commentator here in the US pH it is
Netanyahu is a choice between Rafa and
RI
and all of the meetings in Riad and all
that effort to sort of offer Netanyahu a
big normalization not only with Saudi
Arabia but much of the rest of the
Muslim majority countries which would
follow uh is not off the table yet uh
that package is still being discussed
along with the day after proposals uh
that are going on sure and no do you
think Hamas would agree to this H
so-called prolonged period of quiet
given what Benjamin Netanyahu is saying
about invading Rafa whatever happens I
think Hamas finds itself in a difficult
position because the mediators uh
whether it's Egypt or Qatar have put uh
all their weight Behind These latest
efforts to reach a ceasefire the
situation on the ground is untenable you
have uh the whole population on the
brink of famine you have an impossible
situation where more than you know a
million people nearly a million and a
half people are you know supposed or
expected to be cramed in an area with
absolutely no services or infrastructure
to offer which is called Al maasi it
doesn't fit them it cannot accommodate
them and everybody knows what a RAF
Invasion would mean but on the other
hand I think it's important to also not
that Hamas also has to speak to it own
constituents it cannot be seen as
surrendering it cannot be uh seen as
accepting anything that that is on the
table especially in light of what it
heard and what the whole world heard
from Netanyahu Promises of continuous
war of almost endless war and seeking
the decimation of the enemy we're almost
you know in in a in an exchange that
belongs somewhere in medieval times
where you have one power that goes uh
against you know at War and they want
complete an absolute surrender I think
the adults at the table should
understand by now that that's not going
to happen happen but I find that one of
the things that perhaps is keeping
negotiations back is the fact that the
Americans haven't completely let go of
the idea that they can deliver to
Netanyahu and to Israel a victory
through these talks through
normalization with Saudi Arabia um while
at the same time uh promising a
political Horizon for Palestinians so in
a way canceling out a major Palestinian
player while claiming that this would
ultimately be positive for the
Palestinians and I think that is one of
the reasons why you have a stop and go
Dynamic at this point even though you
have this big carrot of normalization
with Saudi hanging uh in the distance
yeah stop and go is the phrase isn't it
Daniel so as nor say it's a difficult
position for Hamas but if just let's
just say Hamas do agree uh where does
that then leave Benjamin Netanyahu
because he can't then go into rafic can
he or does he just wait no I think prime
minister Netanyahu knows that he can
create the conditions whereby there can
be no Hamas agreement Hamas will not go
into a ceasefire if prime minister
nanahu is promising that after a few
days of calm we are going to make the
hellscape even worse and the American
sponsors of Israel are blaming Hamas
saying well we don't think you should do
ruer quite that way unless there is an
unequivocal American willingness to say
this is as William said a sustainable
Cal whatever language you want to say
there will be no ruer full stop we are
the
guarantors if that is not said then I do
not think there is the prospect of an
agreement prime minister nanyu knows
that that is why he has positioned
himself in the way
he has but prime minister Netanyahu
doesn't want to take the blame there's a
poll in the Israeli media today which
says that the Israeli public would
support by 47 to 32 the rest of don't
knows um a deal that involved the
release of the hostages a permanent end
to this war and the release of thousands
of Palestinians they call the terrorist
Palestinians held uh in Israeli prison
he knows that there is not a consensus
around Raa he knows that within his own
military they're a reservist who have
said they will not show up because of
burnout he knows that 400 families of
soldiers in regular Duty have written to
gance and Eisen Cott in the uh War
cabinet to say if you go into Ruther
it's the end of the hostages please
withdraw from the government if that's
the proposal so there's internal
pressure he needs a way out from that
internal pressure the way out from that
internal pressure is to blame Hamas and
rather that
making this harder for Netanyahu it does
seem that the Secretary of State and the
president have just given Netanyahu his
his get out of this card which for him
is of course also a get out of jail free
card because he is after all still a
prime minister in court who for his
political survival needs the
continuation of the war right now the
International Community of course has
made its position clear President Biden
has said the invasion of Rafer is a red
line uh not easy to see how the Israeli
offensive Rafa could be compliant with
international law so says the UK Deputy
foreign minister Andrew Mitchell France
has weighed into the UN Secretary
General has said uh also there's an
assault on Rafa would be an unbearable
escalation appealing for all those who
have influence over Israel to do
everything in their power to prevent it
so that that's a general view
internationally William Lawrence first
up what does uh President Biden mean
when he says it's a red line can he
bring any more pressure to Bear what if
he Netanyahu did go into Rafa would he
do anything
well as one senior qari negotiator told
me uh if the Americans put in 20% more
pressure in Israel this thing would have
already been over um but let's talk
about Rafa for a minute the Americans
keep saying no but and the but means
protection of the 1.5 million civilians
ined around Rafa and the way to sort of
see where that's going is uh the 40,000
tents for 400,000 people which began to
be built north of Rafa and then doesn't
seem to have gone any any further the
Israelis are telling the Americans
nothing would happen until after
Passover and it would be 2 to four weeks
to move everyone out before the ground
Invasion the Americans were saying it
should take more like three to four
months to move everybody uh and then
this gets to another thing a qari
negotiator told me said this is
basically about hostages prisoners and
troop movements and when he says troop
movements he means which where do the
Israelis pull back to and the latest
offer was sweetened with a pulling off
the Nets serum Corridor which divides
North and South Gap
and the opening of those two rows rows
of the main roads that go north south in
Gaza and also a big movement of
population back towards the north which
would presumably need to be supported by
the new $230 million Pier being built
largely because the Israelis won't let
in Aid uh despite all of the arm
twisting America says it's doing on the
aid and so all of that suggests to me
that things aren't as imminent on Rafa
as they keep saying um blinkin did say
again the day before yesterday there's
no plan we've seen Austin testified the
same thing yesterday so the Americans
are not signing off on Rafa and would
want a massive protection of civilians
we haven't seen yet so in essence the
Americans have kind of boxed n Yahoo in
without anyone really recognizing it or
giving them credit for it they're
basically saying ceasefire or Rafa
operation in a way you've never done any
of this operation and that's something
that n's having a hard time swallowing
and that's one of the reasons we're also
at this impass and nor I'm going to
throw it to you now for any comment off
the back of that but I just want to say
this that the UNA Chief Martin Griffith
said that the simplest truth is that a
ground operation in Rafa will be nothing
short of a tragedy beyond words
no absolutely I think it would be
apocalyptic I mean we've seen the scenes
of the aftermath of ground invasions in
kanun in Alat in Gaza City in Bia and
and they are scenes of utter decimation
uh fast forward six months where you
have an entire population that is
malnutrition that is fatigued that has
lost you know loved ones that knows
there's no way out there is no no
hospitals to go to even and you've got
yourself a combination that no amount of
Aid can possibly um amarate or or make
better um let alone the fact that Aid
would be very difficult to come in and
so on but I think what's really
interesting right now about all of these
statements we're hearing from blinc or
from Washington is just how elastic
those American red lines have proven to
be and we've seen Netanyahu push the
boundaries time and again since October
we've seen him test the uh Biden
administration's willingness to use the
stick instead of the carrot and every
time he's come out on top even when it
comes to the application of US law
regarding you know allies that violate
human rights regarding the leh law
regarding settler attacks regarding um
the attacks on humanitarian Aid workers
and so on so I think in many ways
Netanyahu feels that no matter how much
he kind of turns his back to the Biden
Administration given the fact that this
is election season given the fact that
Biden is so ideologically married to the
idea that there can be no daylight uh
between Israel and the United States
that basically Netanyahu will get away
with whatever he wants he's more focused
on keeping his Coalition and as Daniel
said on staying in power on staying out
of jail so if it takes uh taking the
Americans by surprise and going into ra
I think he will do it and that's I think
where all the Panic the Justified Panic
on the ground in Gaza lies the knowledge
that can get away with it and that
people have to figure out where they
will go which you know over which Rubble
uh they will set up the temp
now Daniel over to you with this
question Benjamin Netanyahu says it's
all about finishing off heras first of
all do you think that's possible because
many of the group's prominent leaders
including ywa Sina are believed to be
still alive and believe to be there but
nobody knows for sure where if they are
and secondly how disabled is Hamas from
your
perspective it's a it's a nice narrative
for Netanyahu to have as I've said I
don't think he's in any hurry to do Raa
I think he has a problem because if he
does go into Rafa he can't tell that
story anymore he can't say well now when
we do Rafa we'll actually have
eradicated Hamas this has been six
months where it's not gone that well on
the battlefield for Israel so has quite
effectively used its asymmetric
capacities of course it's been
devastating for the Palestinians inside
Gaza but the military themselves do not
have a consensus around Rua because they
will also no longer have a story to tell
the myth of Israeli invincibility was
shattered on October the 7th the Army
can still say well if we'd been allowed
to do
rougher then we really could have
finished this job but pressure meant we
couldn't go into Rafa and you are going
to have and this is what some of the
military commentators and some of the
leaks have told us that they're not
looking forward to that they know that
some very unpleasant let's say fighting
awaits the Israeli military uh in Rafa
so no Hamas will not be eradicated natyu
will not have his total Victory when it
was the six-month anniversary many of
the Israeli military commentators were
saying this looks more like total defeat
uh than total Victory he needs to pump
this up but I don't think there is a big
belief that this can be done I think the
Americans have tried to say can we give
you more goodies can we sweeten the pot
with a deal with Saudi Arabia and I
think nanyu has looked at this and said
it's not a Riad or Rafa I want both
Please Mr President and if it's not you
who gives me both someone else will give
me both just as I got Al kuds and Abu
Dhabi I didn't have to choose between
the two of them I could maintain all of
the occupation and get normalization
elsewhere that's what I expect here and
so Netanyahu I I don't want to suggest
that he he feels everything is in his
corner he has felt certain pressures but
unfortunately every time the Americans
could have put the lever that matters
most to him which is the continued
Convoy of weapons to continue this war
they chose not to and I don't see any
change in that no we're coming towards
the end of the program what shift just
very slightly what about Egypt what's
Egypt's role in all of this how worried
would Egypt be about a potential Israeli
invasion of
Rafa Egypt should be and is I think very
worried about an invasion of Rafa this
is a threat to its National Security
Egypt is the uh the country bordering
Gaza it cannot be seen as shooting at
Palestinians seeking refuge and safety
in a fellow uh Arab country but at the
same time it does not not want to go
down in history is the country who
allowed or facilitated the expulsion of
Palestinians yet again from their
Homeland and so Egypt I think will do
whatever it can to push things towards
an agreement even if it were a you know
half good agreement whatever kind of
agreement that can be reached
momentarily hoping that that could kind
of snowball into something more
significant but for Egypt this is a
threat right at its doors and it has to
do something in order to at least
justify where it stands to its
constituents to its people uh and not
not look like a
sell William big protest going on in the
United States aler we've been covering
all sorts of protests happening at
universities as it is right now so if
there was an invasion of Rafa what would
the implications of that be on the
numbers turning up at those protests and
the potential for that getting more more
out of hand if Israeli troops do go in
and the implications of course as
Daniel's referenced in this election
year with President Biden going to the
polls in
November I think it' be quite massive I
think uh we're getting close to 10% of
All American four-year colleges having
major protests and the numbers are just
growing with each unnecessary police
action I haven't se there a few police
actions in neigh are but most of them
are just applications to State violence
for No Good Reason uh and it will
continue to grow I think there's been a
mistaken analysis that this is going to
force Biden in any palpable way I think
it's actually happening is now that
Progressive voters and Arab and Muslim
leaders are saying they would never ever
ever vote for Biden that's pushing Biden
back to the center the haen voters and
all that and I don't think the protess
will massively affect um Biden's
decision making but um the general
position of Americans now and of the
democratic parties this needs to end
immediately um if I could just add one
thing uh to Norah's answer uh Egyptians
have threatened to um suspend this peace
treaty which would be pretty important
and the way that Border's managed there
was a terrible article in foreign policy
saying that Egypt needs to Tak in the
refugees which is a non-starter given
the history of 48 and 67 of the god the
population but I really do believe if I
could just add one more point that
there's a proof of concept here that
American pressure can work it works to
force the 94 sorry the November 24 C-
spot it forced the Israeli response to
Iran to be less it forced the Israelis
at one point to quadruple the a going in
although it's wly insufficient and it
delayed the rough operation by three
months now so there's there's American
pressure can work and Americans just
have to push just hard enough as the
Qatari said uh to force Netanyahu into
this ceas fire and it it can be done if
it's done in the Right Way Daniel can
American pressure work here's a question
for you spin forward 3 months where do
you reckon will be
them I think we will
be
probably with Israeli troops uh in Rafa
doing their worst um and you know we're
in the summer heat is a factor uh the
the the famine spread of disease
humanitarian crisis is not going to go
away I think we'll all be waiting with
some real interest as to what the
Democrat convention in Chicago is going
to look like I hope that's not where we
are I do not think the Americans have
pushed off ruer I think Netanyahu has
been in no hurry I think his military
was not ready for it and I also would
not
discount that nanyu still has other War
making options with hisbah in the North
and the file on the escalation with Iran
is not yet closed but
crucially I would say Israel would be
ill advised to continue to test its
military only path in the region because
it is I would argue storing up some very
very serious future problems for itself
at home in the region and
internationally those don't play out
Accord according to an American
electoral calendar of a few months
though all right we run out of time
we'll have to leave it there Daniel Levy
Nora day and William Lawrence thank you
very much for joining us here on aler on
Inside Story and thank you too for
watching you can find this program and a
whole lot more on our website al.com is
the address and for further discussion
just go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ insid story from me Nick Clark and
the whole team yeah it's goodbye for now
[Music]